==============================
IPv6 For Zen UK
==============================

**Original Author:** Martin Wasley

**Introduction**
-----------------
Zen provide two methods of setting up IPv6.

The first method is a simple DHCP method which should suffice most
users, the second allows you to set up static IPv6 on LAN.
In either case the addresses and prefixes are constant and even under
DHCP will not change. Currently Zen provide a /64 WAN address and a /48
prefix allocation. These will have been given to you by Zen when you
request IPv6.

**Setting up IPv6 using DHCPv6**
--------------------------------


**WAN Interface**
-----------------

Zen use PPPoE in the initial V4 connection, so enter PPPoE as the V4
connection type and set the username and password for the PPPoE
connection, for IPv6 using DHCP, select DHCPv6 in the IPv6 connection as
shown below.

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image1.png
	:width: 100%

The next step is to configure the parameters required for DHCPv6, these
are located in the DHCPv6 client configuration section of the WAN
interface shown below.

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image2.png
	:width: 100%

As stated before, Zen provide a /48 prefix, so select the prefix size
accordingly. 

Click ‘Save’ and then ‘Apply’.

**LAN Interface**
-----------------

All that is required now is to set the LAN interface to use assigned
IPv6 prefix.

Select :menuselection:`Interfaces --> [LAN]` and set the IPv6 Configuration Type to ‘Track
Interface’

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image3.png
	:width: 100%

Finally, set the Track IPv6 Interface to WAN, unless there is a special
requirement which this document does not cover, set the IPv6 Prefix ID
to 0.

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image4.png
	:width: 100%

Click ‘Save’ and then ‘Apply’.

It is advisable at this point to reboot the system.

**Setting up IPv6 using Static Assignment**
-------------------------------------------

Although slightly more complex, this option gives you greater control
over LAN DHCP6 server, as this can be tailored to specific needs.

**Note:** The previous version of this guide provided instructions to configure WAN interface statically. Zen have advised that they are now phasing out static configuration and therefore recommend customers to switch to DHCPv6 for WAN interface.

**WAN Interface**
-----------------

Zen use PPPoE in the initial V4 connection, so enter PPPoE as the V4
connection type and set the username and password for the PPPoE
connection, for IPv6 using DHCP, select DHCPv6 in the IPv6 connection as
shown below.

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image1.png
	:width: 100%

The next step is to configure the parameters required for DHCPv6, these
are located in the DHCPv6 client configuration section of the WAN
interface shown below.

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image2.png
	:width: 100%

As stated before, Zen provide a /48 prefix, so select the prefix size
accordingly. 

Click ‘Save’ and then ‘Apply’.

**LAN Interface**
-----------------

The LAN interface is very simple to set up, all we need to do is set the
IPv6 Configuration Type to Static, and enter our static address.

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image5.png
	:width: 100%

Zen give us a /48 prefix to use on the LAN, so pick an address from that
range. For example our prefix is:

2a02:8242:55AB:\:

So

2a02:8242:55AB:0:4:3:2:1 would suffice.

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image6.png
	:width: 100%

We want to use a /64 prefix on this interface.

**Tip Use the same address as found when setting the system up to use
DHCPv6.**

Click Save and Apply.

**DHCPv6 Server**
-----------------

When using DHCPv6 on the WAN, our DHCPv6 LAN server is set
automatically, however when using statics, we need to set it up. Go to
:menuselection:`Services --> DHCPv6[LAN]`.

Firstly, enable the server.

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image7.png
	:width: 100%

You will notice that the subnet already has a range, and the subnet mask
is the /64 we set on the LAN. There is also a range we must use, the
available range tells us what that can be.

Enter the lower – start range that the server will use

2a02:8231:d256::eeee:0000:0000:0001

Enter the upper – end range that the server will use.

2a02:8231:d256::eeee:ffff:ffff:ffff

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image8.png
	:width: 100%

This should cover most LAN subnets, the range given here gives
281,474.976.710,655 addresses.

We can also set up a prefix delegation range, this is used where we have
sub routers or VLAN’s that need their own range. In the case of
prefixes, we are only interested in the upper 64 bits, as in this
example we will only be giving out 64 bit prefixes. We know we have been
given a /48 prefix by Zen, so we enter our prefix range like this:

.. image:: images/ZenUK_image9.png
	:width: 100%

Our prefix range is the upper 48 bits, plus some of the next 16 bits,
but we must not cross into the range we have used for our LAN addresses.
In the example above I have allowed for up to 254 /64 subnets.

Once these details have been entered, click save.
